  Also known as: Herakles   A Roman sculpture: the bottom half was archaeologically excavated at the Turkish site of Perge and the top half was looted and eventually placed on display at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, USA. Since the early 1980s, debate and dispute have surrounded two halves of a Roman sculpture dating from the Late Antonine period , “of a type known as the Weary Herakles” . Such statues were not uncommon, with many made in this period based on an original 4th Century BC sculpture by the sculptor Lyssipos of Sicyon . In 1980, excavations at Perge in southern Turkey uncovered the lower half of a Weary Herakles statue, amid rumours that looting at the site had included a large item, which many thought may well have been the top half of the same statue . In fact at the time of the excavation of the bottom half of the statue, Jale Inan, director of excavations had heard “rumors that something important had been stolen from the site”  Just one year later in 1981, what would later prove to be the top half of the statue was acquired by the Museum of Fine Arts (MFA), Boston, in fifty-percent partnership with collectors Shelby White and Leon Levy, and it was first exhibited the following year as part of a temporary exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York . The agreement made between the MFA and the New York-based husband and wife collectors White and Levy was that the MFA would receive full ownership upon the death of Leon Levy . Meanwhile, the bottom half of the statue was displayed in the Antalya Museum , shown in recent years in association with a photograph of the upper half of the statue . Furthermore, a “collage” of newspaper cuttings was displayed alongside the Antalya half, describing the ongoing dispute with the MFA . Although seemingly clear from photographs of both halves of the Weary Herakles, and with the corroborative, although anecdotal, reports of a theft from the Perge site not long before the top half emerged in the USA, efforts to prove the connection between the two halves were at first unproductive. Furthermore, the point that the statue type was known to have been made in reasonable abundance, suggesting that there could be numerous fragments of Weary Herakles statues in existence, had been used by MFA staff such as department head Cornelius C. Vermeule III, to cast doubt on the likelihood that the two halves were from the same statue . Three attempts were made to show that the two pieces were actually parts of the same statue, through the use of various plaster casts . Eventually, in 1992, a cast of the lower half was transported to Boston from Antalya and this satisfied observers, including Turkish officials and scholars such as the Metropolitan Museum’s former director Thomas Hoving, that the two halves were in fact of the same statue . However, even this was not initially enough to convince the MFA that their half should be repatriated to Turkey. The MFA suggested that the upper half may have broken, either naturally or accidentally, and been then separated (and exported) before the relevant law had come into force in Turkey that would have prohibited such an action . The MFA’s director of public relations at the time, Robert P Mitchell, even went on record in the Los Angeles Times in 1994, saying: ‘The Museum does not acknowledge Turkey’s claim to ownership. There has never been any evidence that the statue was stolen, and allegations to that effect were entirely unsupported…. Indeed, the break between the top and bottom halves of the statue appears to be an ancient one, such that the top half could have been removed long ago from the territory that is now known as Turkey. In the unfortunate event that the current settlement discussions are not successful, a lawsuit would be necessary. Such a case would raise significant questions.’   In 2003, Leon Levy passed away , and by 2004 the MFA had assumed full ownership of the top half of the Weary Herakles, at which point the museum reopened discussions with the Turkish government ; apparently such negotiations were made easier by not having to involve a donor in the discussions . Finally in 2011 an agreement was reached to return the MFA’s half of the statue to Turkey . Some observers have expressed surprise at how long the process has taken , and prior to the return of the statue, a lack of objection by the MFA to relevant stories run in Boston’s Globe newspaper was perceived by others almost as an admission of guilt with regard to the case . After the return, the MFA notably appointed the first ‘Curator of Provenance’ in a US museum, albeit focusing specifically on objects connected to confiscations by the Nazis during the Second World War . In addition, the return of the Weary Herakles has been attributed with building confidence within the Turkish government to pursue further repatriation claims, connected with plans for a new National Museum in Ankara which, Turkey hopes, will rival such institutions as the Louvre and the British Museum . END 