  Also known as: & Guldhornene   The original Golden Horns of Gallehus, unique Bronze Age artefacts, were stolen and melted down in 1802, causing national uproar in Denmark and even inspiring a famous poem. In 2007, the replicas of the originals were also stolen. The Golden Horns (guldhornene), two spectacular artefacts dating from the 5th Century AD, were discovered in Gallehus, near to Mgeltønder in southern Jutland. Both were found ‘by accident’ by peasants, the first in 1639, and the second in 1734 . They were made of gold, and were decorated with runic inscriptions and animal, human and geometric designs, likely representing ‘scenes from religious rituals, seasonal festivals or myths’ . For years, the first horn was kept in the royal palace , and when the second horn was found, its discovery contributed to a ‘general upsurge of interest in prehistory’ in Denmark, and was one of several finds that contributed to a review of treasure trove law in Denmark . By the time of the beginning of the Nineteenth Century, both horns were key exhibits in the Kunstkammer (Royal Collection) at Christiansborg palace in Copenhagen . On 4 May 1802, the Golden Horns were stolen by a goldsmith named Niels Heidenreich . Apparently, the theft had been possible after the thief had befriended the Kunstkammer keeper and secretly borrowed the key to make a copy of it. He was then able to let himself in and take the horns . The robbery was not made public until 7 May, and the thief had apparently been ‘indiscreet enough to begin selling large quantities of clasps, Indian coins and other fakes manufactured from the gold of the melted down horn’’ . Heidenreich was arrested a year later , and spent almost forty years in prison for his crime . The impact of this loss, seen as a ‘catastrophe’ both then and now , led to the composition of a poem by Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger (also the writer of the Danish national anthem), which mythologised the loss of the horns . The poem and the story of the loss of the horns is still studied in Danish schools , and the Golden Horns themselves have been one of a small number of artefacts and monuments that have come to be used to symbolise Danish national identity and patriotism . Replicas larger than the originals were made of the horns in 1859-60 , with a further set of the correct size made in 1979, based on police reports from 1804 and drawings which also survived from before their destruction . However, several casts that were made of the horns have also been lost, leading to an unavoidable degree of uncertainty regarding the exact appearance of the original horns . Remarkably in 2004, a pair of golden earrings believed to have been made by Heidenreich from the prehistoric gold of the horns were donated to the National Museum of Denmark . These are currently displayed along with both sets of replica horns in the museum in Copenhagen, while another set of earrings made from the original horns are displayed in the Museum at Ringe, on Funen (Fyn) . Even more recently, theft occurred again when early one morning in September 2007 the 1970s replicas were stolen from the Royal Jelling Museum while on temporary exhibition there . On this occasion however, the thieves were caught soon after and the horns were recovered, although one of the horns was damaged by saw marks. A large gold neck ring stolen at the same time had been broken into pieces, some of which are still missing . The impact of the loss of the original Golden Horns has been credited with contributing to the Romantic movement in the North at a time when prehistory generally was becoming significant for nationalism in Denmark . Conversely, it has also been suggested that the nature of the theft in 1802, with the subsequent melting of the horns for their gold content, may hint at why ‘so few of the precious sacred objects have come down to us’ . However, a more lighthearted approach to the loss of the iconic pieces of Danish cultural heritage has recently been adopted by the National Museum, with a downloadable game on the museum’s website available, based on the original theft (). END 